
(A hackneycar, number three hundred and twentyfour, with a
gallantbuttocked mare, driven by James Barton, Harmony Avenue,
Donnybrook, trots past. Blazes Boylan and Lenehan sprawl swaying on the
sideseats. The Ormond boots crouches behind on the axle. Sadly over the
crossblind Lydia Douce and Mina Kennedy gaze.)

THE BOOTS: (Jogging, mocks them with thumb and wriggling wormfingers.)
Haw haw have you the horn?

(Bronze by gold they whisper.)

ZOE: (To Florry.) Whisper.

(They whisper again.)

(Over the well of the car Blazes Boylan leans, his boater straw set
sideways, a red flower in his mouth. Lenehan in yachtsman’s cap and
white shoes officiously detaches a long hair from Blazes Boylan’s coat
shoulder.)

LENEHAN: Ho! What do I here behold? Were you brushing the cobwebs off a
few quims?

BOYLAN: (Sated, smiles.) Plucking a turkey.

LENEHAN: A good night’s work.

BOYLAN: (Holding up four thick bluntungulated fingers, winks.) Blazes
Kate! Up to sample or your money back. (He holds out a forefinger.)
Smell that.

LENEHAN: (Smells gleefully.) Ah! Lobster and mayonnaise. Ah!

ZOE AND FLORRY: (Laugh together.) Ha ha ha ha.

BOYLAN: (Jumps surely from the car and calls loudly for all to hear.)
Hello, Bloom! Mrs Bloom dressed yet?

BLOOM: (In flunkey’s prune plush coat and kneebreeches, buff stockings
and powdered wig.) I’m afraid not, sir. The last articles...

BOYLAN: (Tosses him sixpence.) Here, to buy yourself a gin and splash.
(He hangs his hat smartly on a peg of Bloom’s antlered head.) Show me
in. I have a little private business with your wife, you understand?

BLOOM: Thank you, sir. Yes, sir. Madam Tweedy is in her bath, sir.

MARION: He ought to feel himself highly honoured. (She plops splashing
out of the water.) Raoul darling, come and dry me. I’m in my pelt. Only
my new hat and a carriage sponge.

BOYLAN: (A merry twinkle in his eye.) Topping!

BELLA: What? What is it?

(Zoe whispers to her.)

MARION: Let him look, the pishogue! Pimp! And scourge himself! I’ll
write to a powerful prostitute or Bartholomona, the bearded woman, to
raise weals out on him an inch thick and make him bring me back a signed
and stamped receipt.

BOYLAN: (Clasps himself.) Here, I can’t hold this little lot much
longer. (He strides off on stiff cavalry legs.)

BELLA: (Laughing.) Ho ho ho ho.

BOYLAN: (To Bloom, over his shoulder.) You can apply your eye to the
keyhole and play with yourself while I just go through her a few times.

BLOOM: Thank you, sir. I will, sir. May I bring two men chums to witness
the deed and take a snapshot? (He holds out an ointment jar.) Vaseline,
sir? Orangeflower...? Lukewarm water...?

KITTY: (From the sofa.) Tell us, Florry. Tell us. What...

(Florry whispers to her. Whispering lovewords murmur, liplapping loudly,
poppysmic plopslop.)

MINA KENNEDY: (Her eyes upturned.) O, it must be like the scent of
geraniums and lovely peaches! O, he simply idolises every bit of her!
Stuck together! Covered with kisses!

LYDIA DOUCE: (Her mouth opening.) Yumyum. O, he’s carrying her round the
room doing it! Ride a cockhorse. You could hear them in Paris and New
York. Like mouthfuls of strawberries and cream.

KITTY: (Laughing.) Hee hee hee.

BOYLAN’S VOICE: (Sweetly, hoarsely, in the pit of his stomach.) Ah!
Godblazeqrukbrukarchkrasht!

MARION’S VOICE: (Hoarsely, sweetly, rising to her throat.) O!
Weeshwashtkissinapooisthnapoohuck?

BLOOM: (His eyes wildly dilated, clasps himself.) Show! Hide! Show!
Plough her! More! Shoot!

BELLA, ZOE, FLORRY, KITTY: Ho ho! Ha ha! Hee hee!

LYNCH: (Points.) The mirror up to nature. (He laughs.) Hu hu hu hu hu!

(Stephen and Bloom gaze in the mirror. The face of William Shakespeare,
beardless, appears there, rigid in facial paralysis, crowned by the
reflection of the reindeer antlered hatrack in the hall.)

SHAKESPEARE: (In dignified ventriloquy.) ‘Tis the loud laugh bespeaks
the vacant mind. (To Bloom.) Thou thoughtest as how thou wastest
invisible. Gaze. (He crows with a black capon’s laugh.) Iagogo! How my
Oldfellow chokit his Thursdaymornun. Iagogogo!

BLOOM: (Smiles yellowly at the three whores.) When will I hear the joke?

ZOE: Before you’re twice married and once a widower.

BLOOM: Lapses are condoned. Even the great Napoleon when measurements
were taken next the skin after his death...

(Mrs Dignam, widow woman, her snubnose and cheeks flushed with
deathtalk, tears and Tunney’s tawny sherry, hurries by in her weeds,
her bonnet awry, rouging and powdering her cheeks, lips and nose, a
pen chivvying her brood of cygnets. Beneath her skirt appear her late
husband’s everyday trousers and turnedup boots, large eights. She holds
a Scottish widows’ insurance policy and a large marquee umbrella under
which her brood run with her, Patsy hopping on one shod foot, his collar
loose, a hank of porksteaks dangling, Freddy whimpering, Susy with a
crying cod’s mouth, Alice struggling with the baby. She cuffs them on,
her streamers flaunting aloft.)

FREDDY: Ah, ma, you’re dragging me along!

SUSY: Mamma, the beeftea is fizzing over!

SHAKESPEARE: (With paralytic rage.) Weda seca whokilla farst.

(The face of Martin Cunningham, bearded, refeatures Shakespeare’s
beardless face. The marquee umbrella sways drunkenly, the children run
aside. Under the umbrella appears Mrs Cunningham in Merry Widow hat and
kimono gown. She glides sidling and bowing, twirling japanesily.)

MRS CUNNINGHAM: (Sings.)

      And they call me the jewel of Asia!

MARTIN CUNNINGHAM: (Gazes on her, impassive.) Immense! Most bloody awful
demirep!

STEPHEN: Et exaltabuntur cornua iusti. Queens lay with prize bulls.
Remember Pasiphae for whose lust my grandoldgrossfather made the first
confessionbox. Forget not Madam Grissel Steevens nor the suine scions
of the house of Lambert. And Noah was drunk with wine. And his ark was
open.

BELLA: None of that here. Come to the wrong shop.

LYNCH: Let him alone. He’s back from Paris.

ZOE: (Runs to stephen and links him.) O go on! Give us some parleyvoo.

(Stephen claps hat on head and leaps over to the fireplace where he
stands with shrugged shoulders, finny hands outspread, a painted smile
on his face.)

LYNCH: (Pommelling on the sofa.) Rmm Rmm Rmm Rrrrrrmmmm.

STEPHEN: (Gabbles with marionette jerks.) Thousand places of
entertainment to expense your evenings with lovely ladies saling gloves
and other things perhaps hers heart beerchops perfect fashionable
house very eccentric where lots cocottes beautiful dressed much about
princesses like are dancing cancan and walking there parisian clowneries
extra foolish for bachelors foreigns the same if talking a poor english
how much smart they are on things love and sensations voluptuous.
Misters very selects for is pleasure must to visit heaven and hell show
with mortuary candles and they tears silver which occur every night.
Perfectly shocking terrific of religion’s things mockery seen in
universal world. All chic womans which arrive full of modesty then
disrobe and squeal loud to see vampire man debauch nun very fresh young
with dessous troublants. (He clacks his tongue loudly.) Ho, là là! Ce
pif qu’il a!

LYNCH: Vive le vampire!

THE WHORES: Bravo! Parleyvoo!

STEPHEN: (Grimacing with head back, laughs loudly, clapping himself.)
Great success of laughing. Angels much prostitutes like and holy
apostles big damn ruffians. Demimondaines nicely handsome sparkling of
diamonds very amiable costumed. Or do you are fond better what belongs
they moderns pleasure turpitude of old mans? (He points about him with
grotesque gestures which Lynch and the whores reply to.) Caoutchouc
statue woman reversible or lifesize tompeeptom of virgins nudities very
lesbic the kiss five ten times. Enter, gentleman, to see in mirror every
positions trapezes all that machine there besides also if desire act
awfully bestial butcher’s boy pollutes in warm veal liver or omlet on
the belly pièce de Shakespeare.

BELLA: (Clapping her belly sinks back on the sofa, with a shout of
laughter.) An omelette on the... Ho! ho! ho! ho!... omelette on the...

STEPHEN: (Mincingly.) I love you, sir darling. Speak you englishman
tongue for double entente cordiale. O yes, mon loup. How much cost?
Waterloo. Watercloset. (He ceases suddenly and holds up a forefinger.)

BELLA: (Laughing.) Omelette...

THE WHORES: (Laughing.) Encore! Encore!

STEPHEN: Mark me. I dreamt of a watermelon.

ZOE: Go abroad and love a foreign lady.

LYNCH: Across the world for a wife.

FLORRY: Dreams goes by contraries.

STEPHEN: (Extends his arms.) It was here. Street of harlots. In
Serpentine avenue Beelzebub showed me her, a fubsy widow. Where’s the
red carpet spread?

BLOOM: (Approaching Stephen.) Look...

STEPHEN: No, I flew. My foes beneath me. And ever shall be. World
without end. (He cries.) Pater! Free!

BLOOM: I say, look...

STEPHEN: Break my spirit, will he? O merde alors! (He cries, his vulture
talons sharpened.) Hola! Hillyho!

(Simon Dedalus’ voice hilloes in answer, somewhat sleepy but ready.)

SIMON: That’s all right. (He swoops uncertainly through the air,
wheeling, uttering cries of heartening, on strong ponderous buzzard
wings.) Ho, boy! Are you going to win? Hoop! Pschatt! Stable with those
halfcastes. Wouldn’t let them within the bawl of an ass. Head up! Keep
our flag flying! An eagle gules volant in a field argent displayed.
Ulster king at arms! Haihoop! (He makes the beagle’s call, giving
tongue.) Bulbul! Burblblburblbl! Hai, boy!

(The fronds and spaces of the wallpaper file rapidly across country.
A stout fox, drawn from covert, brush pointed, having buried his
grandmother, runs swift for the open, brighteyed, seeking badger earth,
under the leaves. The pack of staghounds follows, nose to the ground,
sniffing their quarry, beaglebaying, burblbrbling to be blooded. Ward
Union huntsmen and huntswomen live with them, hot for a kill. From Six
Mile Point, Flathouse, Nine Mile Stone follow the footpeople with knotty
sticks, hayforks, salmongaffs, lassos, flockmasters with stockwhips,
bearbaiters with tomtoms, toreadors with bullswords, grey negroes
waving torches. The crowd bawls of dicers, crown and anchor players,
thimbleriggers, broadsmen. Crows and touts, hoarse bookies in high
wizard hats clamour deafeningly.)

THE CROWD:

     Card of the races. Racing card!
     Ten to one the field!
     Tommy on the clay here! Tommy on the clay!
     Ten to one bar one! Ten to one bar one!
     Try your luck on Spinning Jenny!
     Ten to one bar one!
     Sell the monkey, boys! Sell the monkey!
     I’ll give ten to one!
     Ten to one bar one!

(A dark horse, riderless, bolts like a phantom past the winningpost,
his mane moonfoaming, his eyeballs stars. The field follows, a bunch of
bucking mounts. Skeleton horses, Sceptre, Maximum the Second, Zinfandel,
the Duke of Westminster’s Shotover, Repulse, the Duke of Beaufort’s
Ceylon, prix de Paris. Dwarfs ride them, rustyarmoured, leaping, leaping
in their, in their saddles. Last in a drizzle of rain on a brokenwinded
isabelle nag, Cock of the North, the favourite, honey cap, green jacket,
orange sleeves, Garrett Deasy up, gripping the reins, a hockeystick at
the ready. His nag on spavined whitegaitered feet jogs along the rocky
road.)

THE ORANGE LODGES: (Jeering.) Get down and push, mister. Last lap!
You’ll be home the night!

GARRETT DEASY: (Bolt upright, his nailscraped face plastered with
postagestamps, brandishes his hockeystick, his blue eyes flashing in the
prism of the chandelier as his mount lopes by at schooling gallop.)

Per vias rectas!

(A yoke of buckets leopards all over him and his rearing nag a torrent
of mutton broth with dancing coins of carrots, barley, onions, turnips,
potatoes.)

THE GREEN LODGES: Soft day, sir John! Soft day, your honour!

(Private Carr, Private Compton and Cissy Caffrey pass beneath the
windows, singing in discord.)

STEPHEN: Hark! Our friend noise in the street.

ZOE: (Holds up her hand.) Stop!

PRIVATE CARR, PRIVATE COMPTON AND CISSY CAFFREY:

      Yet I’ve a sort of a
      Yorkshire relish for...

ZOE: That’s me. (She claps her hands.) Dance! Dance! (She runs to the
pianola.) Who has twopence?

BLOOM: Who’ll...?

LYNCH: (Handing her coins.) Here.

STEPHEN: (Cracking his fingers impatiently.) Quick! Quick! Where’s my
augur’s rod? (He runs to the piano and takes his ashplant, beating his
foot in tripudium.)

ZOE: (Turns the drumhandle.) There.

(She drops two pennies in the slot. Gold, pink and violet lights
start forth. The drum turns purring in low hesitation waltz. Professor
Goodwin, in a bowknotted periwig, in court dress, wearing a stained
inverness cape, bent in two from incredible age, totters across the
room, his hands fluttering. He sits tinily on the pianostool and lifts
and beats handless sticks of arms on the keyboard, nodding with damsel’s
grace, his bowknot bobbing.)

ZOE: (Twirls round herself, heeltapping.) Dance. Anybody here for there?
Who’ll dance? Clear the table.

(The pianola with changing lights plays in waltz time the prelude of My
Girl’s a Yorkshire Girl. Stephen throws his ashplant on the table and
seizes Zoe round the waist. Florry and Bella push the table towards the
fireplace. Stephen, arming Zoe with exaggerated grace, begins to waltz
her round the room. Bloom stands aside. Her sleeve falling from gracing
arms reveals a white fleshflower of vaccination. Between the curtains
Professor Maginni inserts a leg on the toepoint of which spins a silk
hat. With a deft kick he sends it spinning to his crown and jauntyhatted
skates in. He wears a slate frockcoat with claret silk lapels, a gorget
of cream tulle, a green lowcut waistcoat, stock collar with white
kerchief, tight lavender trousers, patent pumps and canary gloves. In
his buttonhole is an immense dahlia. He twirls in reversed directions
a clouded cane, then wedges it tight in his oxter. He places a hand
lightly on his breastbone, bows, and fondles his flower and buttons.)

MAGINNI: The poetry of motion, art of calisthenics. No connection
with Madam Legget Byrne’s or Levenston’s. Fancy dress balls arranged.
Deportment. The Katty Lanner step. So. Watch me! My terpsichorean
abilities. (He minuets forward three paces on tripping bee’s feet.) Tout
le monde en avant! Révérence! Tout le monde en place!

(The prelude ceases. Professor Goodwin, beating vague arms shrivels,
sinks, his live cape falling about the stool. The air in firmer waltz
time sounds. Stephen and Zoe circle freely. The lights change, glow,
fade gold rosy violet.)

THE PIANOLA:

      Two young fellows were talking about their girls, girls, girls,
      Sweethearts they’d left behind...

(From a corner the morning hours run out, goldhaired, slimsandalled,
in girlish blue, waspwaisted, with innocent hands. Nimbly they dance,
twirling their skipping ropes. The hours of noon follow in amber gold.
Laughing, linked, high haircombs flashing, they catch the sun in mocking
mirrors, lifting their arms.)

MAGINNI: (Clipclaps glovesilent hands.) Carré! Avant deux! Breathe
evenly! Balance!

(The morning and noon hours waltz in their places, turning, advancing to
each other, shaping their curves, bowing visavis. Cavaliers behind them
arch and suspend their arms, with hands descending to, touching, rising
from their shoulders.)

HOURS: You may touch my.

CAVALIERS: May I touch your?

HOURS: O, but lightly!

CAVALIERS: O, so lightly!

THE PIANOLA:

      My little shy little lass has a waist.

(Zoe and Stephen turn boldly with looser swing. The twilight hours
advance from long landshadows, dispersed, lagging, languideyed, their
cheeks delicate with cipria and false faint bloom. They are in grey
gauze with dark bat sleeves that flutter in the land breeze.)

MAGINNI: Avant huit! Traversé! Salut! Cours de mains! Croisé!

(The night hours, one by one, steal to the last place. Morning, noon and
twilight hours retreat before them. They are masked, with daggered hair
and bracelets of dull bells. Weary they curchycurchy under veils.)

THE BRACELETS: Heigho! Heigho!

ZOE: (Twirling, her hand to her brow.) O!

MAGINNI: Les tiroirs! Chaîne de dames! La corbeille! Dos à dos!

(Arabesquing wearily they weave a pattern on the floor, weaving,
unweaving, curtseying, twirling, simply swirling.)

ZOE: I’m giddy!

(She frees herself, droops on a chair. Stephen seizes Florry and turns
with her.)

MAGINNI: Boulangère! Les ronds! Les ponts! Chevaux de bois! Escargots!

(Twining, receding, with interchanging hands the night hours link each
each with arching arms in a mosaic of movements. Stephen and Florry turn
cumbrously.)

MAGINNI: Dansez avec vos dames! Changez de dames! Donnez le petit
bouquet à votre dame! Remerciez!

THE PIANOLA:

     Best, best of all,
     Baraabum!

KITTY: (Jumps up.) O, they played that on the hobbyhorses at the Mirus
bazaar!

(She runs to Stephen. He leaves Florry brusquely and seizes Kitty. A
screaming bittern’s harsh high whistle shrieks. Groangrousegurgling
Toft’s cumbersome whirligig turns slowly the room right roundabout the
room.)

THE PIANOLA:

     My girl’s a Yorkshire girl.

ZOE:

Yorkshire through and through. Come on all!

(She seizes Florry and waltzes her.)

STEPHEN: Pas seul!

(He wheels Kitty into Lynch’s arms, snatches up his ashplant from the
table and takes the floor. All wheel whirl waltz twirl. Bloombella
Kittylynch Florryzoe jujuby women. Stephen with hat ashplant frogsplits
in middle highkicks with skykicking mouth shut hand clasp part under
thigh. With clang tinkle boomhammer tallyho hornblower blue green yellow
flashes Toft’s cumbersome turns with hobbyhorse riders from gilded
snakes dangled, bowels fandango leaping spurn soil foot and fall again.)

THE PIANOLA:

     Though she’s a factory lass
     And wears no fancy clothes.

(Closeclutched swift swifter with glareblareflare scudding they
scootlootshoot lumbering by. Baraabum!)

TUTTI: Encore! Bis! Bravo! Encore!

SIMON: Think of your mother’s people!

STEPHEN: Dance of death.

(Bang fresh barang bang of lacquey’s bell, horse, nag, steer, piglings,
Conmee on Christass, lame crutch and leg sailor in cockboat armfolded
ropepulling hitching stamp hornpipe through and through. Baraabum! On
nags hogs bellhorses Gadarene swine Corny in coffin. Steel shark stone
onehandled Nelson two trickies Frauenzimmer plumstained from pram
falling bawling. Gum he’s a champion. Fuseblue peer from barrel rev.
evensong Love on hackney jaunt Blazes blind coddoubled bicyclers Dilly
with snowcake no fancy clothes. Then in last switchback lumbering up
and down bump mashtub sort of viceroy and reine relish for tublumber
bumpshire rose. Baraabum!)

(The couples fall aside. Stephen whirls giddily. Room whirls back. Eyes
closed he totters. Red rails fly spacewards. Stars all around suns turn
roundabout. Bright midges dance on walls. He stops dead.)

STEPHEN: Ho!

(Stephen’s mother, emaciated, rises stark through the floor, in leper
grey with a wreath of faded orangeblossoms and a torn bridal veil, her
face worn and noseless, green with gravemould. Her hair is scant and
lank. She fixes her bluecircled hollow eyesockets on Stephen and opens
her toothless mouth uttering a silent word. A choir of virgins and
confessors sing voicelessly.)

THE CHOIR:

     Liliata rutilantium te confessorum...
     Iubilantium te virginum...

(From the top of a tower Buck Mulligan, in particoloured jester’s dress
of puce and yellow and clown’s cap with curling bell, stands gaping at
her, a smoking buttered split scone in his hand.)

BUCK MULLIGAN: She’s beastly dead. The pity of it! Mulligan meets the
afflicted mother. (He upturns his eyes.) Mercurial Malachi!

THE MOTHER: (With the subtle smile of death’s madness.) I was once the
beautiful May Goulding. I am dead.

STEPHEN: (Horrorstruck.) Lemur, who are you? No. What bogeyman’s trick
is this?

BUCK MULLIGAN: (Shakes his curling capbell.) The mockery of it! Kinch
dogsbody killed her bitchbody. She kicked the bucket. (Tears of molten
butter fall from his eyes on to the scone.) Our great sweet mother! Epi
oinopa ponton.

THE MOTHER: (Comes nearer, breathing upon him softly her breath of
wetted ashes.) All must go through it, Stephen. More women than men in
the world. You too. Time will come.

STEPHEN: (Choking with fright, remorse and horror.) They say I killed
you, mother. He offended your memory. Cancer did it, not I. Destiny.

THE MOTHER: (A green rill of bile trickling from a side of her mouth.)
You sang that song to me. Love’s bitter mystery.

STEPHEN: (Eagerly.) Tell me the word, mother, if you know now. The word
known to all men.

THE MOTHER: Who saved you the night you jumped into the train at
Dalkey with Paddy Lee? Who had pity for you when you were sad among the
strangers? Prayer is allpowerful. Prayer for the suffering souls in the
Ursuline manual and forty days’ indulgence. Repent, Stephen.

STEPHEN: The ghoul! Hyena!

THE MOTHER: I pray for you in my other world. Get Dilly to make you that
boiled rice every night after your brainwork. Years and years I loved
you, O, my son, my firstborn, when you lay in my womb.

ZOE: (Fanning herself with the grate fan.) I’m melting!

FLORRY: (Points to Stephen.) Look! He’s white.

BLOOM: (Goes to the window to open it more.) Giddy.

THE MOTHER: (With smouldering eyes.) Repent! O, the fire of hell!

STEPHEN: (Panting.) His noncorrosive sublimate! The corpsechewer! Raw
head and bloody bones.

THE MOTHER: (Her face drawing near and nearer, sending out an ashen
breath.) Beware! (She raises her blackened withered right arm slowly
towards Stephen’s breast with outstretched finger.) Beware God’s hand!
(A green crab with malignant red eyes sticks deep its grinning claws in
Stephen’s heart.)

STEPHEN: (Strangled with rage.) Shite! (His features grow drawn grey and
old.)

BLOOM: (At the window.) What?

STEPHEN: Ah non, par exemple! The intellectual imagination! With me all
or not at all. Non serviam!

FLORRY: Give him some cold water. Wait. (She rushes out.)

THE MOTHER: (Wrings her hands slowly, moaning desperately.) O Sacred
Heart of Jesus, have mercy on him! Save him from hell, O Divine Sacred
Heart!

STEPHEN: No! No! No! Break my spirit, all of you, if you can! I’ll bring
you all to heel!

THE MOTHER: (In the agony of her deathrattle.) Have mercy on Stephen,
Lord, for my sake! Inexpressible was my anguish when expiring with love,
grief and agony on Mount Calvary.

STEPHEN: Nothung!

(He lifts his ashplant high with both hands and smashes the chandelier.
Time’s livid final flame leaps and, in the following darkness, ruin of
all space, shattered glass and toppling masonry.)

THE GASJET: Pwfungg!

BLOOM: Stop!

LYNCH: (Rushes forward and seizes Stephen’s hand.) Here! Hold on! Don’t
run amok!

BELLA: Police!

(Stephen, abandoning his ashplant, his head and arms thrown back stark,
beats the ground and flies from the room, past the whores at the door.)

BELLA: (Screams.) After him!

(The two whores rush to the halldoor. Lynch and Kitty and Zoe stampede
from the room. They talk excitedly. Bloom follows, returns.)

THE WHORES: (Jammed in the doorway, pointing.) Down there.

ZOE: (Pointing.) There. There’s something up.

BELLA: Who pays for the lamp? (She seizes Bloom’s coattail.) Here, you
were with him. The lamp’s broken.

BLOOM: (Rushes to the hall, rushes back.) What lamp, woman?

A WHORE: He tore his coat.

BELLA: (Her eyes hard with anger and cupidity, points.) Who’s to pay for
that? Ten shillings. You’re a witness.

BLOOM: (Snatches up Stephen’s ashplant.) Me? Ten shillings? Haven’t you
lifted enough off him? Didn’t he...?

BELLA: (Loudly.) Here, none of your tall talk. This isn’t a brothel. A
ten shilling house.

BLOOM: (His head under the lamp, pulls the chain. Pulling, the gasjet
lights up a crushed mauve purple shade. He raises the ashplant.) Only
the chimney’s broken. Here is all he...

BELLA: (Shrinks back and screams.) Jesus! Don’t!

BLOOM: (Warding off a blow.) To show you how he hit the paper. There’s
not sixpenceworth of damage done. Ten shillings!

FLORRY: (With a glass of water, enters.) Where is he?

BELLA: Do you want me to call the police?

BLOOM: O, I know. Bulldog on the premises. But he’s a Trinity student.
Patrons of your establishment. Gentlemen that pay the rent. (He makes a
masonic sign.) Know what I mean? Nephew of the vicechancellor. You don’t
want a scandal.

BELLA: (Angrily.) Trinity. Coming down here ragging after the boatraces
and paying nothing. Are you my commander here or? Where is he? I’ll
charge him! Disgrace him, I will! (_She shouts_.) Zoe! Zoe!

BLOOM: (Urgently.) And if it were your own son in Oxford? (Warningly.) I
know.

BELLA: (Almost speechless.) Who are. Incog!

ZOE: (In the doorway.) There’s a row on.

BLOOM: What? Where? (He throws a shilling on the table and starts.)
That’s for the chimney. Where? I need mountain air.

(He hurries out through the hall. The whores point. Florry follows,
spilling water from her tilted tumbler. On the doorstep all the whores
clustered talk volubly, pointing to the right where the fog has cleared
off. From the left arrives a jingling hackney car. It slows to in front
of the house. Bloom at the halldoor perceives Corny Kelleher who is
about to dismount from the car with two silent lechers. He averts
his face. Bella from within the hall urges on her whores. They blow
ickylickysticky yumyum kisses. Corny Kelleher replies with a ghastly
lewd smile. The silent lechers turn to pay the jarvey. Zoe and Kitty
still point right. Bloom, parting them swiftly, draws his caliph’s hood
and poncho and hurries down the steps with sideways face. Incog Haroun
al Raschid he flits behind the silent lechers and hastens on by the
railings with fleet step of a pard strewing the drag behind him, torn
envelopes drenched in aniseed. The ashplant marks his stride. A pack
of bloodhounds, led by Hornblower of Trinity brandishing a dogwhip in
tallyho cap and an old pair of grey trousers, follow from far, picking
up the scent, nearer, baying, panting, at fault, breaking away, throwing
their tongues, biting his heels, leaping at his tail. He walks,
runs, zigzags, gallops, lugs laid back. He is pelted with gravel,
cabbagestumps, biscuitboxes, eggs, potatoes, dead codfish, woman’s
slipperslappers. After him freshfound the hue and cry zigzag gallops
in hot pursuit of follow my leader: 65 C, 66 C, night watch, John Henry
Menton, Wisdom Hely, V. B. Dillon, Councillor Nannetti, Alexander Keyes,
Larry O’Rourke, Joe Cuffe, Mrs O’Dowd, Pisser Burke, The Nameless One,
Mrs Riordan, The Citizen, Garryowen, Whodoyoucallhim, Strangeface,
Fellowthatsolike, Sawhimbefore, Chapwithawen, Chris Callinan, sir
Charles Cameron, Benjamin Dollard, Lenehan, Bartell d’Arcy, Joe Hynes,
red Murray, editor Brayden, T. M. Healy, Mr Justice Fitzgibbon, John
Howard Parnell, the reverend Tinned Salmon, Professor Joly, Mrs
Breen, Denis Breen, Theodore Purefoy, Mina Purefoy, the Westland
Row postmistress, C. P. M’Coy, friend of Lyons, Hoppy Holohan,
maninthestreet, othermaninthestreet, Footballboots, pugnosed driver,
rich protestant lady, Davy Byrne, Mrs Ellen M’Guinness, Mrs Joe
Gallaher, George Lidwell, Jimmy Henry on corns, Superintendent Laracy,
Father Cowley, Crofton out of the Collector-general’s, Dan Dawson,
dental surgeon Bloom with tweezers, Mrs Bob Doran, Mrs Kennefick,
Mrs Wyse Nolan, John Wyse Nolan,
handsomemarriedwomanrubbedagainstwidebehindinClonskea tram, the
bookseller of Sweets of Sin, Miss Dubedatandshedidbedad, Mesdames
Gerald and Stanislaus Moran of Roebuck, the managing clerk of Drimmie’s,
Wetherup, colonel Hayes, Mastiansky, Citron, Penrose, Aaron Figatner,
Moses Herzog, Michael E Geraghty, Inspector Troy, Mrs Galbraith, the
constable off Eccles street corner, old doctor Brady with stethoscope,
the mystery man on the beach, a retriever, Mrs Miriam Dandrade and all
her lovers.)

THE HUE AND CRY: (Helterskelterpelterwelter.) He’s Bloom! Stop Bloom!
Stopabloom! Stopperrobber! Hi! Hi! Stophim on the corner!

(At the corner of Beaver street beneath the scaffolding Bloom panting
stops on the fringe of the noisy quarrelling knot, a lot not knowing a
jot what hi! hi! row and wrangle round the whowhat brawlaltogether.)

STEPHEN: (With elaborate gestures, breathing deeply and slowly.) You are
my guests. Uninvited. By virtue of the fifth of George and seventh of
Edward. History to blame. Fabled by mothers of memory.

PRIVATE CARR: (To Cissy Caffrey.) Was he insulting you?

STEPHEN: Addressed her in vocative feminine. Probably neuter.
Ungenitive.

VOICES: No, he didn’t. I seen him. The girl there. He was in Mrs
Cohen’s. What’s up? Soldier and civilian.

CISSY CAFFREY: I was in company with the soldiers and they left me to
do—you know, and the young man run up behind me. But I’m faithful to the
man that’s treating me though I’m only a shilling whore.

STEPHEN: (Catches sight of Lynch’s and Kitty’s heads.) Hail, Sisyphus.
(He points to himself and the others.) Poetic. Uropoetic.

VOICES: Shes faithfultheman.

CISSY CAFFREY: Yes, to go with him. And me with a soldier friend.

PRIVATE COMPTON: He doesn’t half want a thick ear, the blighter. Biff
him one, Harry.

PRIVATE CARR: (To Cissy.) Was he insulting you while me and him was
having a piss?

LORD TENNYSON: (Gentleman poet in Union Jack blazer and cricket
flannels, bareheaded, flowingbearded.) Theirs not to reason why.

PRIVATE COMPTON: Biff him, Harry.

STEPHEN: (To Private Compton.) I don’t know your name but you are quite
right. Doctor Swift says one man in armour will beat ten men in their
shirts. Shirt is synechdoche. Part for the whole.

CISSY CAFFREY: (To the crowd.) No, I was with the privates.

STEPHEN: (Amiably.) Why not? The bold soldier boy. In my opinion every
lady for example...

PRIVATE CARR: (His cap awry, advances to Stephen.) Say, how would it be,
governor, if I was to bash in your jaw?

STEPHEN: (Looks up to the sky.) How? Very unpleasant. Noble art of
selfpretence. Personally, I detest action. (He waves his hand.) Hand
hurts me slightly. Enfin ce sont vos oignons. (To Cissy Caffrey.) Some
trouble is on here. What is it precisely?

DOLLY GRAY: (From her balcony waves her handkerchief, giving the sign of
the heroine of Jericho.) Rahab. Cook’s son, goodbye. Safe home to Dolly.
Dream of the girl you left behind and she will dream of you.

(The soldiers turn their swimming eyes.)

BLOOM: (Elbowing through the crowd, plucks Stephen’s sleeve vigorously.)
Come now, professor, that carman is waiting.

STEPHEN: (Turns.) Eh? (He disengages himself.) Why should I not speak to
him or to any human being who walks upright upon this oblate orange? (He
points his finger.) I’m not afraid of what I can talk to if I see his
eye. Retaining the perpendicular.

(He staggers a pace back.)

BLOOM: (Propping him.) Retain your own.

STEPHEN: (Laughs emptily.) My centre of gravity is displaced. I have
forgotten the trick. Let us sit down somewhere and discuss. Struggle
for life is the law of existence but but human philirenists, notably the
tsar and the king of England, have invented arbitration. (He taps his
brow.) But in here it is I must kill the priest and the king.

BIDDY THE CLAP: Did you hear what the professor said? He’s a professor
out of the college.

CUNTY KATE: I did. I heard that.

BIDDY THE CLAP: He expresses himself with such marked refinement of
phraseology.

CUNTY KATE: Indeed, yes. And at the same time with such apposite
trenchancy.

PRIVATE CARR: (Pulls himself free and comes forward.) What’s that you’re
saying about my king?

(Edward the Seventh appears in an archway. He wears a white jersey on
which an image of the Sacred Heart is stitched with the insignia of
Garter and Thistle, Golden Fleece, Elephant of Denmark, Skinner’s
and Probyn’s horse, Lincoln’s Inn bencher and ancient and honourable
artillery company of Massachusetts. He sucks a red jujube. He is robed
as a grand elect perfect and sublime mason with trowel and apron, marked
made in Germany. In his left hand he holds a plasterer’s bucket on which
is printed Défense d’uriner. A roar of welcome greets him.)

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: (Slowly, solemnly but indistinctly.) Peace, perfect
peace. For identification, bucket in my hand. Cheerio, boys. (He turns
to his subjects.) We have come here to witness a clean straight fight
and we heartily wish both men the best of good luck. Mahak makar a bak.

(He shakes hands with Private Carr, Private Compton, Stephen, Bloom and
Lynch. General applause. Edward the Seventh lifts his bucket graciously
in acknowledgment.)

PRIVATE CARR: (To Stephen.) Say it again.

STEPHEN: (Nervous, friendly, pulls himself up.) I understand your point
of view though I have no king myself for the moment. This is the age of
patent medicines. A discussion is difficult down here. But this is the
point. You die for your country. Suppose. (He places his arm on Private
Carr’s sleeve.) Not that I wish it for you. But I say: Let my country
die for me. Up to the present it has done so. I didn’t want it to die.
Damn death. Long live life!

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: (Levitates over heaps of slain, in the garb and with
the halo of Joking Jesus, a white jujube in his phosphorescent face.)

      My methods are new and are causing surprise.
      To make the blind see I throw dust in their eyes.

STEPHEN: Kings and unicorns! (He falls back a pace.) Come somewhere and
we’ll... What was that girl saying?...

PRIVATE COMPTON: Eh, Harry, give him a kick in the knackers. Stick one
into Jerry.

BLOOM: (To the privates, softly.) He doesn’t know what he’s saying.
Taken a little more than is good for him. Absinthe. Greeneyed monster. I
know him. He’s a gentleman, a poet. It’s all right.

STEPHEN: (Nods, smiling and laughing.) Gentleman, patriot, scholar and
judge of impostors.

PRIVATE CARR: I don’t give a bugger who he is.

PRIVATE COMPTON: We don’t give a bugger who he is.

STEPHEN: I seem to annoy them. Green rag to a bull.

(Kevin Egan of Paris in black Spanish tasselled shirt and peep-o’-day
boy’s hat signs to Stephen.)

KEVIN EGAN: H’lo! Bonjour! The vieille ogresse with the dents jaunes.

(Patrice Egan peeps from behind, his rabbitface nibbling a quince leaf.)

PATRICE: Socialiste!

DON EMILE PATRIZIO FRANZ RUPERT POPE HENNESSY: (In medieval hauberk, two
wild geese volant on his helm, with noble indignation points a mailed
hand against the privates.) Werf those eykes to footboden, big grand
porcos of johnyellows todos covered of gravy!

BLOOM: (To Stephen.) Come home. You’ll get into trouble.

STEPHEN: (Swaying.) I don’t avoid it. He provokes my intelligence.

BIDDY THE CLAP: One immediately observes that he is of patrician
lineage.

THE VIRAGO: Green above the red, says he. Wolfe Tone.

THE BAWD: The red’s as good as the green. And better. Up the soldiers!
Up King Edward!

A ROUGH: (Laughs.) Ay! Hands up to De Wet.

THE CITIZEN: (With a huge emerald muffler and shillelagh, calls.)

     May the God above
     Send down a dove
     With teeth as sharp as razors
     To slit the throats
     Of the English dogs
     That hanged our Irish leaders.

THE CROPPY BOY: (The ropenoose round his neck, gripes in his issuing
bowels with both hands.)

      I bear no hate to a living thing,
      But I love my country beyond the king.

RUMBOLD, DEMON BARBER: (Accompanied by two blackmasked assistants,
advances with gladstone bag which he opens.) Ladies and gents,
cleaver purchased by Mrs Pearcy to slay Mogg. Knife with which Voisin
dismembered the wife of a compatriot and hid remains in a sheet in the
cellar, the unfortunate female’s throat being cut from ear to ear. Phial
containing arsenic retrieved from body of Miss Barron which sent Seddon
to the gallows.

(He jerks the rope. The assistants leap at the victim’s legs and drag
him downward, grunting: the croppy boy’s tongue protrudes violently.)

THE CROPPY BOY:

      Horhot ho hray hor hother’s hest.

(He gives up the ghost. A violent erection of the hanged sends gouts
of sperm spouting through his deathclothes on to the cobblestones. Mrs
Bellingham, Mrs Yelverton Barry and the Honourable Mrs Mervyn Talboys
rush forward with their handkerchiefs to sop it up.)

RUMBOLD: I’m near it myself. (He undoes the noose.) Rope which hanged
the awful rebel. Ten shillings a time. As applied to Her Royal Highness.
(He plunges his head into the gaping belly of the hanged and draws out
his head again clotted with coiled and smoking entrails.) My painful
duty has now been done. God save the king!

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: (Dances slowly, solemnly, rattling his bucket, and
sings with soft contentment.)

      On coronation day, on coronation day,
      O, won’t we have a merry time,
      Drinking whisky, beer and wine!

PRIVATE CARR: Here. What are you saying about my king?

STEPHEN: (Throws up his hands.) O, this is too monotonous! Nothing. He
wants my money and my life, though want must be his master, for some
brutish empire of his. Money I haven’t. (He searches his pockets
vaguely.) Gave it to someone.

PRIVATE CARR: Who wants your bleeding money?

STEPHEN: (Tries to move off.) Will someone tell me where I am least
likely to meet these necessary evils? Ça se voit aussi à Paris. Not that
I... But, by Saint Patrick...!

(The women’s heads coalesce. Old Gummy Granny in sugarloaf hat appears
seated on a toadstool, the deathflower of the potato blight on her
breast.)

STEPHEN: Aha! I know you, gammer! Hamlet, revenge! The old sow that eats
her farrow!

OLD GUMMY GRANNY: (Rocking to and fro.) Ireland’s sweetheart, the king
of Spain’s daughter, alanna. Strangers in my house, bad manners to them!
(She keens with banshee woe.) Ochone! Ochone! Silk of the kine! (She
wails.) You met with poor old Ireland and how does she stand?

STEPHEN: How do I stand you? The hat trick! Where’s the third person of
the Blessed Trinity? Soggarth Aroon? The reverend Carrion Crow.

CISSY CAFFREY: (Shrill.) Stop them from fighting!

A ROUGH: Our men retreated.

PRIVATE CARR: (Tugging at his belt.) I’ll wring the neck of any fucker
says a word against my fucking king.

BLOOM: (Terrified.) He said nothing. Not a word. A pure
misunderstanding.

THE CITIZEN: Erin go bragh!

(Major Tweedy and the Citizen exhibit to each other medals, decorations,
trophies of war, wounds. Both salute with fierce hostility.)

PRIVATE COMPTON: Go it, Harry. Do him one in the eye. He’s a proboer.

STEPHEN: Did I? When?

BLOOM: (To the redcoats.) We fought for you in South Africa, Irish
missile troops. Isn’t that history? Royal Dublin Fusiliers. Honoured by
our monarch.

THE NAVVY: (Staggering past.) O, yes! O God, yes! O, make the kwawr a
krowawr! O! Bo!

(Casqued halberdiers in armour thrust forward a pentice of gutted
spearpoints. Major Tweedy, moustached like Turko the terrible, in
bearskin cap with hackleplume and accoutrements, with epaulettes, gilt
chevrons and sabretaches, his breast bright with medals, toes the line.
He gives the pilgrim warrior’s sign of the knights templars.)

MAJOR TWEEDY: (Growls gruffly.) Rorke’s Drift! Up, guards, and at them!
Mahar shalal hashbaz.

PRIVATE CARR: I’ll do him in.

PRIVATE COMPTON: (Waves the crowd back.) Fair play, here. Make a
bleeding butcher’s shop of the bugger.

(Massed bands blare Garryowen and God save the King.)

CISSY CAFFREY: They’re going to fight. For me!

CUNTY KATE: The brave and the fair.

BIDDY THE CLAP: Methinks yon sable knight will joust it with the best.

CUNTY KATE: (Blushing deeply.) Nay, madam. The gules doublet and merry
saint George for me!

STEPHEN:

      The harlot’s cry from street to street
      Shall weave Old Ireland’s windingsheet.

PRIVATE CARR: (Loosening his belt, shouts.) I’ll wring the neck of any
fucking bastard says a word against my bleeding fucking king.

BLOOM: (Shakes Cissy Caffrey’s shoulders.) Speak, you! Are you struck
dumb? You are the link between nations and generations. Speak, woman,
sacred lifegiver!

CISSY CAFFREY: (Alarmed, seizes Private Carr’s sleeve.) Amn’t I with
you? Amn’t I your girl? Cissy’s your girl. (She cries.) Police!

STEPHEN: (Ecstatically, to Cissy Caffrey.)

     White thy fambles, red thy gan
     And thy quarrons dainty is.

VOICES: Police!

DISTANT VOICES: Dublin’s burning! Dublin’s burning! On fire, on fire!

(Brimstone fires spring up. Dense clouds roll past. Heavy Gatling guns
boom. Pandemonium. Troops deploy. Gallop of hoofs. Artillery. Hoarse
commands. Bells clang. Backers shout. Drunkards bawl. Whores screech.
Foghorns hoot. Cries of valour. Shrieks of dying. Pikes clash on
cuirasses. Thieves rob the slain. Birds of prey, winging from the sea,
rising from marshlands, swooping from eyries, hover screaming, gannets,
cormorants, vultures, goshawks, climbing woodcocks, peregrines, merlins,
blackgrouse, sea eagles, gulls, albatrosses, barnacle geese. The
midnight sun is darkened. The earth trembles. The dead of Dublin
from Prospect and Mount Jerome in white sheepskin overcoats and black
goatfell cloaks arise and appear to many. A chasm opens with a noiseless
yawn. Tom Rochford, winner, in athlete’s singlet and breeches, arrives
at the head of the national hurdle handicap and leaps into the void.
He is followed by a race of runners and leapers. In wild attitudes they
spring from the brink. Their bodies plunge. Factory lasses with fancy
clothes toss redhot Yorkshire baraabombs. Society ladies lift their
skirts above their heads to protect themselves. Laughing witches in red
cutty sarks ride through the air on broomsticks. Quakerlyster plasters
blisters. It rains dragons’ teeth. Armed heroes spring up from furrows.
They exchange in amity the pass of knights of the red cross and fight
duels with cavalry sabres: Wolfe Tone against Henry Grattan, Smith
O’Brien against Daniel O’Connell, Michael Davitt against Isaac Butt,
Justin M’Carthy against Parnell, Arthur Griffith against John Redmond,
John O’Leary against Lear O’Johnny, Lord Edward Fitzgerald against Lord
Gerald Fitzedward, The O’Donoghue of the Glens against The Glens of
The O’Donoghue. On an eminence, the centre of the earth, rises the
fieldaltar of Saint Barbara. Black candles rise from its gospel and
epistle horns. From the high barbacans of the tower two shafts of light
fall on the smokepalled altarstone. On the altarstone Mrs Mina Purefoy,
goddess of unreason, lies, naked, fettered, a chalice resting on her
swollen belly. Father Malachi O’Flynn in a lace petticoat and reversed
chasuble, his two left feet back to the front, celebrates camp mass. The
Reverend Mr Hugh C Haines Love M. A. in a plain cassock and mortarboard,
his head and collar back to the front, holds over the celebrant’s head
an open umbrella.)

FATHER MALACHI O’FLYNN: Introibo ad altare diaboli.

THE REVEREND MR HAINES LOVE: To the devil which hath made glad my young
days.

FATHER MALACHI O’FLYNN: (Takes from the chalice and elevates a
blooddripping host.) Corpus meum.

THE REVEREND MR HAINES LOVE: (Raises high behind the celebrant’s
petticoat, revealing his grey bare hairy buttocks between which a carrot
is stuck.) My body.

THE VOICE OF ALL THE DAMNED: Htengier Tnetopinmo Dog Drol eht rof,
Aiulella!

(From on high the voice of Adonai calls.)

ADONAI: Dooooooooooog!

THE VOICE OF ALL THE BLESSED: Alleluia, for the Lord God Omnipotent
reigneth!

(From on high the voice of Adonai calls.)

ADONAI: Goooooooooood!

(In strident discord peasants and townsmen of Orange and Green factions
sing Kick the Pope and Daily, daily sing to Mary.)

PRIVATE CARR: (With ferocious articulation.) I’ll do him in, so help me
fucking Christ! I’ll wring the bastard fucker’s bleeding blasted fucking
windpipe!

(The retriever, nosing on the fringe of the crowd, barks noisily.)

OLD GUMMY GRANNY: (Thrusts a dagger towards Stephen’s hand.) Remove him,
acushla. At 8.35 a.m. you will be in heaven and Ireland will be free.
(She prays.) O good God, take him!

BLOOM: (Runs to Lynch.) Can’t you get him away?

LYNCH: He likes dialectic, the universal language. Kitty! (To Bloom.)
Get him away, you. He won’t listen to me.

(He drags Kitty away.)

STEPHEN: (Points.) Exit Judas. Et laqueo se suspendit.

BLOOM: (Runs to Stephen.) Come along with me now before worse happens.
Here’s your stick.

STEPHEN: Stick, no. Reason. This feast of pure reason.

CISSY CAFFREY: (Pulling Private Carr.) Come on, you’re boosed. He
insulted me but I forgive him. (Shouting in his ear.) I forgive him for
insulting me.

BLOOM: (Over Stephen’s shoulder.) Yes, go. You see he’s incapable.

PRIVATE CARR: (Breaks loose.) I’ll insult him.

(He rushes towards Stephen, fist outstretched, and strikes him in the
face. Stephen totters, collapses, falls, stunned. He lies prone, his
face to the sky, his hat rolling to the wall. Bloom follows and picks it
up.)

MAJOR TWEEDY: (Loudly.) Carbine in bucket! Cease fire! Salute!

THE RETRIEVER: (Barking furiously.) Ute ute ute ute ute ute ute ute.

THE CROWD: Let him up! Don’t strike him when he’s down! Air! Who? The
soldier hit him. He’s a professor. Is he hurted? Don’t manhandle him!
He’s fainted!

A HAG: What call had the redcoat to strike the gentleman and he under
the influence. Let them go and fight the Boers!

THE BAWD: Listen to who’s talking! Hasn’t the soldier a right to go with
his girl? He gave him the coward’s blow.

(They grab at each other’s hair, claw at each other and spit.)

THE RETRIEVER: (Barking.) Wow wow wow.

BLOOM: (Shoves them back, loudly.) Get back, stand back!

PRIVATE COMPTON: (Tugging his comrade.) Here. Bugger off, Harry. Here’s
the cops! (Two raincaped watch, tall, stand in the group.)

FIRST WATCH: What’s wrong here?

PRIVATE COMPTON: We were with this lady. And he insulted us. And
assaulted my chum. (The retriever barks.) Who owns the bleeding tyke?

CISSY CAFFREY: (With expectation.) Is he bleeding!

A MAN: (Rising from his knees.) No. Gone off. He’ll come to all right.

BLOOM: (Glances sharply at the man.) Leave him to me. I can easily...

SECOND WATCH: Who are you? Do you know him?

PRIVATE CARR: (Lurches towards the watch.) He insulted my lady friend.

BLOOM: (Angrily.) You hit him without provocation. I’m a witness.
Constable, take his regimental number.

SECOND WATCH: I don’t want your instructions in the discharge of my
duty.

PRIVATE COMPTON: (Pulling his comrade.) Here, bugger off Harry. Or
Bennett’ll shove you in the lockup.

PRIVATE CARR: (Staggering as he is pulled away.) God fuck old Bennett.
He’s a whitearsed bugger. I don’t give a shit for him.

FIRST WATCH: (Takes out his notebook.) What’s his name?

BLOOM: (Peering over the crowd.) I just see a car there. If you give me
a hand a second, sergeant...

FIRST WATCH: Name and address.

(Corny Kelleher, weepers round his hat, a death wreath in his hand,
appears among the bystanders.)

BLOOM: (Quickly.) O, the very man! (He whispers.) Simon Dedalus’ son. A
bit sprung. Get those policemen to move those loafers back.

SECOND WATCH: Night, Mr Kelleher.

CORNY KELLEHER: (To the watch, with drawling eye.) That’s all right.
I know him. Won a bit on the races. Gold cup. Throwaway. (He laughs.)
Twenty to one. Do you follow me?

FIRST WATCH: (Turns to the crowd.) Here, what are you all gaping at?
Move on out of that.

(The crowd disperses slowly, muttering, down the lane.)

CORNY KELLEHER: Leave it to me, sergeant. That’ll be all right. (He
laughs, shaking his head.) We were often as bad ourselves, ay or worse.
What? Eh, what?

FIRST WATCH: (Laughs.) I suppose so.

CORNY KELLEHER: (Nudges the second watch.) Come and wipe your name off
the slate. (He lilts, wagging his head.) With my tooraloom tooraloom
tooraloom tooraloom. What, eh, do you follow me?

SECOND WATCH: (Genially.) Ah, sure we were too.

CORNY KELLEHER: (Winking.) Boys will be boys. I’ve a car round there.

SECOND WATCH: All right, Mr Kelleher. Good night.

CORNY KELLEHER: I’ll see to that.

BLOOM: (Shakes hands with both of the watch in turn.) Thank you very
much, gentlemen. Thank you. (He mumbles confidentially.) We don’t want
any scandal, you understand. Father is a wellknown highly respected
citizen. Just a little wild oats, you understand.

FIRST WATCH: O. I understand, sir.

SECOND WATCH: That’s all right, sir.

FIRST WATCH: It was only in case of corporal injuries I’d have to report
it at the station.

BLOOM: (Nods rapidly.) Naturally. Quite right. Only your bounden duty.

SECOND WATCH: It’s our duty.

CORNY KELLEHER: Good night, men.

THE WATCH: (Saluting together.) Night, gentlemen. (They move off with
slow heavy tread.)

BLOOM: (Blows.) Providential you came on the scene. You have a car?...

CORNY KELLEHER: (Laughs, pointing his thumb over his right shoulder to
the car brought up against the scaffolding.) Two commercials that were
standing fizz in Jammet’s. Like princes, faith. One of them lost two
quid on the race. Drowning his grief. And were on for a go with the
jolly girls. So I landed them up on Behan’s car and down to nighttown.

BLOOM: I was just going home by Gardiner street when I happened to...

CORNY KELLEHER: (Laughs.) Sure they wanted me to join in with the mots.
No, by God, says I. Not for old stagers like myself and yourself. (He
laughs again and leers with lacklustre eye.) Thanks be to God we have it
in the house, what, eh, do you follow me? Hah, hah, hah!

BLOOM: (Tries to laugh.) He, he, he! Yes. Matter of fact I was just
visiting an old friend of mine there, Virag, you don’t know him (poor
fellow, he’s laid up for the past week) and we had a liquor together and
I was just making my way home...

(The horse neighs.)

THE HORSE: Hohohohohohoh! Hohohohome!

CORNY KELLEHER: Sure it was Behan our jarvey there that told me after
we left the two commercials in Mrs Cohen’s and I told him to pull up and
got off to see. (He laughs.) Sober hearsedrivers a speciality. Will I
give him a lift home? Where does he hang out? Somewhere in Cabra, what?

BLOOM: No, in Sandycove, I believe, from what he let drop.

(Stephen, prone, breathes to the stars. Corny Kelleher, asquint, drawls
at the horse. Bloom, in gloom, looms down.)

CORNY KELLEHER: (Scratches his nape.) Sandycove! (He bends down and
calls to Stephen.) Eh! (He calls again.) Eh! He’s covered with shavings
anyhow. Take care they didn’t lift anything off him.

BLOOM: No, no, no. I have his money and his hat here and stick.

CORNY KELLEHER: Ah, well, he’ll get over it. No bones broken. Well, I’ll
shove along. (He laughs.) I’ve a rendezvous in the morning. Burying the
dead. Safe home!

THE HORSE: (Neighs.) Hohohohohome.

BLOOM: Good night. I’ll just wait and take him along in a few...

(Corny Kelleher returns to the outside car and mounts it. The horse
harness jingles.)

CORNY KELLEHER: (From the car, standing.) Night.

BLOOM: Night.

(The jarvey chucks the reins and raises his whip encouragingly. The
car and horse back slowly, awkwardly, and turn. Corny Kelleher on the
sideseat sways his head to and fro in sign of mirth at Bloom’s plight.
The jarvey joins in the mute pantomimic merriment nodding from the
farther seat. Bloom shakes his head in mute mirthful reply. With thumb
and palm Corny Kelleher reassures that the two bobbies will allow the
sleep to continue for what else is to be done. With a slow nod Bloom
conveys his gratitude as that is exactly what Stephen needs. The car
jingles tooraloom round the corner of the tooraloom lane. Corny Kelleher
again reassuralooms with his hand. Bloom with his hand assuralooms Corny
Kelleher that he is reassuraloomtay. The tinkling hoofs and jingling
harness grow fainter with their tooralooloo looloo lay. Bloom, holding
in his hand Stephen’s hat, festooned with shavings, and ashplant, stands
irresolute. Then he bends to him and shakes him by the shoulder.)

BLOOM: Eh! Ho! (There is no answer; he bends again.) Mr Dedalus! (There
is no answer.) The name if you call. Somnambulist. (He bends again
and, hesitating, brings his mouth near the face of the prostrate form.)
Stephen! (There is no answer. He calls again.) Stephen!

STEPHEN: (Groans.) Who? Black panther. Vampire. (He sighs and stretches
himself, then murmurs thickly with prolonged vowels.)

     Who... drive... Fergus now
     And pierce... wood’s woven shade?...

(He turns on his left side, sighing, doubling himself together.)

BLOOM: Poetry. Well educated. Pity. (He bends again and undoes
the buttons of Stephen’s waistcoat.) To breathe. (He brushes the
woodshavings from Stephen’s clothes with light hand and fingers.) One
pound seven. Not hurt anyhow. (He listens.) What?

STEPHEN: (Murmurs.)

    ... shadows... the woods
    ... white breast... dim sea.

(He stretches out his arms, sighs again and curls his body. Bloom,
holding the hat and ashplant, stands erect. A dog barks in the distance.
Bloom tightens and loosens his grip on the ashplant. He looks down on
Stephen’s face and form.)

BLOOM: (Communes with the night.) Face reminds me of his poor mother.
In the shady wood. The deep white breast. Ferguson, I think I caught.
A girl. Some girl. Best thing could happen him. (He murmurs.)... swear
that I will always hail, ever conceal, never reveal, any part or parts,
art or arts... (He murmurs.)... in the rough sands of the sea... a
cabletow’s length from the shore... where the tide ebbs... and flows ...

(Silent, thoughtful, alert he stands on guard, his fingers at his lips
in the attitude of secret master. Against the dark wall a figure appears
slowly, a fairy boy of eleven, a changeling, kidnapped, dressed in an
Eton suit with glass shoes and a little bronze helmet, holding a book
in his hand. He reads from right to left inaudibly, smiling, kissing the
page.)

BLOOM: (Wonderstruck, calls inaudibly.) Rudy!

RUDY: (Gazes, unseeing, into Bloom’s eyes and goes on reading, kissing,
smiling. He has a delicate mauve face. On his suit he has diamond and
ruby buttons. In his free left hand he holds a slim ivory cane with a
violet bowknot. A white lambkin peeps out of his waistcoat pocket.)


— III —
